\input texinfo  @c -*-texinfo-*-

@c %**start of header
@setfilename smbc.info
@include version.texi
@settitle Smbc @value{VERSION} Manual
@c Disable the monstrous rectangles beside overfull hbox-es.
@finalout
@c Use `odd' to print double-sided.
@setchapternewpage on

@paragraphindent 3
@firstparagraphindent insert

@exampleindent 4
@c %**end of header

@iftex
@c Remove this if you don't use A4 paper.
@afourpaper
@end iftex

@set MY_LIVE For my wife Magda and our child.
@iftex
@set MY_LIVE 
@end iftex

@copying
@value{MY_LIVE}

This file documents the Samba Commander (Smbc) utility for downloading 
and uploading from network data.

@c man begin COPYRIGHT
Copyright @copyright{} 2003 - 2005 Rafal Michniewicz.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with the
Invariant Sections being ``GNU General Public License'' and ``GNU Free
Documentation License'', with no Front-Cover Texts, and with no
Back-Cover Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the section
entitled ``GNU Free Documentation License''.
@end quotation
@end copying

@ifnottex
@node Top, Overview, ,
@top Smbc @value{VERSION}

@insertcopying
@menu
* Overview::            Features of Smbc.
* Invoking::            Smbc usage.
* How the Smbc works::  Algorytms.
* Functions in Smbc::   Functions in Smbc.
* Menus and keys::      Keys in menus.
* Contributors::        Thanks to.
* Copying::             You may give out copies of Smbc and of this manual.
* Index::               Topics covered by this manual.
@end menu
@end ifnottex

@titlepage
@title Samba Commander (Smbc) @value{VERSION}
@subtitle The interactive download and upload utility
@subtitle Updated for Smbc @value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}
@author by Rafal Michniewicz
@vskip 5pt
For my wife Magda and our child.

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@node Overview, Invoking, Top, Top
@chapter Overview
@cindex overview
@cindex features

Samba Commander is a text mode SMB network commander. In Smbc, you can 
browse the local network or you can use the search function to find the 
files. You can also download/upload files and directories or create 
them both locally and remotely. Smbc has a resume function and supports 
UTF-8 characters.

@node Invoking, How the Smbc works, Overview, Top
@chapter Invoking
@cindex invoking
@cindex arguments

By default, Smbc is very simple to invoke.

@menu
* Options::                                                          Execude Smbc.
* Content of parameters form ~/.smbc/smbcrc configuration file::     Parameters for configuration files.
* Content of ~/.smbc/ directory::                                    Working directory.
@end menu

@example
smbc [@var{options}]@dots{} 
@end example

Usually Smbc is running without parameters. During first run Smbc creates
directory with name ".smbc" in home user directory. In this new directory
Smbc finds configuration file with name "smbcrc". If this file is empty or
if Smbc cannot open configuration file it runs with default configuration.
The example file with all parameters you can find usually at
"PREFIX_INSTALATION/share/smbc/sample.smbcrc".

@node Options, Content of parameters form ~/.smbc/smbcrc configuration file, , Invoking
@section Options
@cindex options
Some functions of Smbc are available only as parameters.

@table @samp

@item -V
@itemx --version
Displays the version of Smbc.

@item -h
@itemx --help
Prints a help message describing all of Smbc's command-line options.

@item -f
@itemx --flush
Flushs all download/upload lists. All files from "~/.smbc/" with name 
"dulist*" will  be removed. In next run of Smbc the download/upload 
list will be empty.

@item -l
@itemx --list
Shows all download/upload lists from "~/.smbc/".

@item -s INT
@itemx --show=INT
Displays all items form list with numer INT. You can get all number from list
executing smbc -l command.

@item -p
@itemx --sleep
Sleeps  Smbc.  Smbc doesn't download/upload any files when execuding
even if some files wait in queue.

@item -m STRING
@itemx --message=STRING
Receives message from Samba. If you want that Smbc receives WinPopup
message you must add bellow line to smb.conf

@exampleindent 0
@example
message command = /path_to/smbc -m 'message from %f on %m' -i %s; rm %s
@end example
@exampleindent 4

Now if you have running Smbc and someone sends you a WinPopup message
Smbc immediatelly displays it. If Smbc doesn't run all WinPopup messages
wait for executing Smbc.

@item -i STRING
@itemx --file=STRING
Sets file with samba message, usage only with -m.
@end table

@exampleindent 0

@node Content of parameters form ~/.smbc/smbcrc configuration file, Content of ~/.smbc/ directory, Options, Invoking
@section Content of parameters form ~/.smbc/smbcrc configuration file
@cindex parameters
@table @samp
@item username
@cindex username
Username that is used during login to remote host, default "guest".

@item password
@cindex password
Password that is enter during login to remote host, default none.

@item smbclient
@cindex smbclient
Path to file "smbclient", necessery for sending WinPopup message,
default none.  Only functions concantenate with send and receive 
a WinPopup messages work as frontend, Samba Team doesn't include 
this functions in libsmbclient library.

@item localdir
@cindex localdir
Starts local directory when running Smbc, default HOME.

@item workgroup
@cindex workgroup
Starts workgroup, default none.

@item host
@cindex host
Starts host, default none.

@item share
@cindex share
Starts remote host dir, default none.

@item typeofsort-left
@item typeofsort-right
@cindex typeofsort-left
@cindex typeofsort-right
Type of files and directories sorting in selected panels, default 1.
@example
typeofsort-left 1 - sort by filenames
typeofsort-left 2 - sort by extension
typeofsort-left 3 - sort by size
typeofsort-left 4 - don't sort
@end example

@item revesesort-left
@item revesesort-right
@cindex reversesort-left
@cindex reversesort-right
Type of reverse sorting, default 0.
@example
reversesort 1 - on
reversesort 0 - off
@end example

@item group-left
@item group-right
@cindex group-left
@cindex group-right
Group files and directories, default 1.
@example
group-left 1 - on
group-left 0 - off
@end example

@item timeout
@cindex timeout
Connection time out in seconds, default 3 seconds. This parameter was used 
when Smbc tries to  connect to remote host and waits for response. If you have
the Samba in version oldest than 3.0.0 this parameter doesn't work and
Smbc may be waiting for very long time.

@item autoresume
@cindex autoresume
Autoresumes download, doesn't ask if connection is broken, default 0.
If connection to remote host or to local file was broken and autoresume
was set to 1 Smbc sets retry-delay-time for this file and immediatelly
goes to next item in download/upload list.
@example
autoresume 1 - on
autoresume 0 - off
@end example

@item indextime
@cindex indextime
Time between smbc restarts network files indexing in seconds,
default 300 seconds.
@example
indextime  0 - Smbc disables network files indexing
indextime  1 - Smbc ony once indexes network files
indextime  300 - Smbc indexes network files, then delay, 300 second and
                 restart indexing
@end example

@item char-convert
@cindex char-convert
Converts all chars from UTF-8 to terminal charset,
(@pxref{Characters conversion})
, default enabled.
@example
char-convert 1 - enable conversion
char-convert 0 - disable conversion
@end example

@item retry-delay-time
@cindex retry-delay-time
Delay time of retrying download is seconds, default 60 second.

@item askquit
@cindex askquit
Asks if quit from Smbc, default 1.
@example
askquit 1 - ask
askquit 0 - don't ask
@end example

@item retry-read-groups
@cindex retry-read-groups
How many times smbc retries to read groups when samba returns fail 
or empty result, default retry-read-groups 5.
@example
retry-read-groups = -1 - retries to success
retry-read-groups = 0  - doesn't retry
retry-read-groups > 0  - retries retry-read-groups times
@end example

@item retry-read-hosts
@cindex retry-read-hosts
How many times smbc retries to read hosts when samba returns fail 
or empty result, default retry-read-hosts 5.
@example
retry-read-hosts = -1 - retries to success
retry-read-hosts = 0  - doesn't retry
retry-read-hosts > 0  - retries retry-read-hosts times
@end example

@item retry-read-shares
@cindex retry-read-shares
How many times smbc retries to read shares when samba returns fail 
or empty result, default retry-read-shares 5.
@example
retry-read-shares = -1 - retries to success
retry-read-shares = 0  - doesn't retry
retry-read-shares > 0  - retries retry-read-shares times
@end example

@item colorK XXXX,YYYY,ZZZZ
@cindex color
Defines three colors, where XXXX,YYYY,ZZZZ are red,green,blue 
and have value = <0000..1000> ,K has value <0..2>,
default 0 colors defined.
@example
examples:
color0 0100,0100,0610
color1 0900,0080,0900
color2 0010,0500,0500
@end example

@item extcolorK
@cindex extcolor
Defines color for file extension, K has value <0..2>, one 
definition per line, maximal extension length = 10 chars
,default 0 colors defined.
@example
examples:
extcolor0 exe
extcolor0 bin
extcolor0 bat
extcolor0 tar
extcolor0 gz
extcolor0 tgz
extcolor1 mp3
extcolor1 wav
extcolor1 mod
extcolor2 avi
extcolor2 mpg
extcolor2 mpeg
@end example
 
@end table
@exampleindent 4

@node Content of ~/.smbc/ directory, , Content of parameters form ~/.smbc/smbcrc configuration file, Invoking
@section Content of ~/.smbc/ directory
@cindex smbc directory
@table @samp

@item smbcrc
Configuration file.

@item smbc.lock
This file is a semaphore to manage a download lists.
(@pxref{Management of a download/upload list of files}).

@item bookmark
This file includes all bookmarks.

@item findfile
The "quick find file function" is used to search files. 
Access to this file is faster than access to network.

@item findfileprim
If a function of indexing a network is enabled all founded files 
in network are written to this "findfileprim" file. If all files from
network were indexed "findfileprim" file was renamed to "findfile"
and now you can use "quick find file function".

@item debug
If Smbc during instalation is configured with option "--with-debug" 
all debug messages are saved to this "debug" file.
@end table

@node How the Smbc works, Functions in Smbc, Invoking, Top
@chapter How the Smbc works

@menu
* Management of a download/upload list of files::   Download/upload files.
* A quick file found::                              Quick find - index.
* Characters conversion::                           Character set in Smbc.
* Retrying download/upload files::                  Resume function.
* Sending and receiving WinPopup messages::         WinPopup messages.
@end menu

@node Management of a download/upload list of files, A quick file found, , How the Smbc works
@section Management of a download/upload list of files
@cindex download
@cindex upload

If you add a fiew files do download/upload list and you quit from Smbc
before Smbc finished download/upload all files, then Smbc saves this
list to file "~/.smbc/dulistX" where X is a first free number.
If you do the same at one time with more that one Smbc in "~/.smbc/" 
directory will be created more that one "dufileX"; example:
@example
dulist0
dulist1
dulist2
@end example
At some time you again run Smbc. Now Smbc is searching to "~/.smbc/" directory
to files "dulistX" find and load a file with the smallest numer.
If this instance of Smbc finishes download/upload all files it is searching
again "~/.smbc/" directory and again load next found "dulistX" file.

@node A quick file found, Characters conversion, Management of a download/upload list of files, How the Smbc works
@section A quick file found
@cindex quick find

If you run a first instance of Smbc, Smbc creates a child process. A child
process is looking for all files from network and saves it to file "findfileprim"
in "~/.smbc" directory. When all files form network were found the child 
process rename file "findfileprim" to "findfile" and sends message to Smbc 
process that a process from network searching files was finished.
At this time you can use a quick find file function.
If you run more than one instance of Smbc only one Smbc indexing files
from network process is started. If this instance of Smbc will be closed, next 
instance of Smbc creates a child process for indexing a network files.
The child process after finishing files from network indexing waits "indextime"
(@pxref{Content of parameters form ~/.smbc/smbcrc configuration file}) seconds and 
starts indexing again.

@node Characters conversion, Retrying download/upload files, A quick file found, How the Smbc works
@section Characters conversion
@cindex characters conversion

Smbc can convert all characters received from network and from system to 
characters used by terminal. If a parameter "char-convert" was set to 1, 
the internal characters in Smbc are UTF-8 and Smbc convert, all character 
from/to terminal, system and network. If the parameter "char-convert" is 
set as 0 Smbc disables conversion.

@node Retrying download/upload files, Sending and receiving WinPopup messages, Characters conversion, How the Smbc works
@section Retrying download/upload files
@cindex retrying download

Smbc downloades/uploades files and suddenly the connection to remote host
broken. In this situation Smbc responds at with way two actions, first if 
the parameter
"autoresume" is set to 0, the Smbc displays menu "message when connection is broken"
(@pxref{Message when connection is broken}) and waits for user decision.
At this menu user can decide what Smbc must do cancel, 
wait, overwrite with immediate retry, retry after fiew seconds or
retry after fiew seconds without asking if the connections will be broken again.
Second if the parameter "autoresume" is set to 1, the Smbc retries after fiew seconds
without asking.

@node Sending and receiving WinPopup messages, , Retrying download/upload files, How the Smbc works
@section Sending and receiving WinPopup messages
@cindex WinPopup

Smbc can send and receive WinPopup messages, but this function works
as frontend. Samba Team doesn't include in libsmbclient library functions to
send and receive WinPopup messages. To send messages you must first
configure Smbc. You must "smbclient" parameter sets in "~/.smbc/smbcrc"; 
for example
@example
smbclient /usr/bin/smbclient
@end example
If you want to receive WinPopup messages you must set
"message command"  parameter in "smb.conf" file; for example
@example
message command = /path_to/smbc -m 'message from %f on %m' -i %s; rm %s
@end example
At this time Samba after receiving a WinPopup message executes Smbc and 
Smbc saves received message to temporary directory. If you run
Smbc at the same time when message is received it is immediatelly
displayed; if not, message will be displayed after you run Smbc.

@node Functions in Smbc, Menus and keys, How the Smbc works, Top
@chapter Functions in Smbc

@menu
* Find file function::                 Find file function.
@end menu

@node Find file function,,, Functions in Smbc
@section Find file function
@cindex find file

Quick find file function finds files in entire network. In slow find file function 
you can select where do you want to search for files. If some files or directories were
selected Smbc searches only in them else Smbc searches in all subdirectories.


@node Menus and keys, Contributors, Functions in Smbc, Top
@chapter Menus and keys

@menu
* Main menu::                          Main menu keys.
* Download/upload list menu::          Download/upload list menu keys.
* Bookmark list menu::                 Bookmark list menu keys.
* Message when connection is broken::  Messages when connection is broken - menu keys.
* Find file menu::                     Find file menu keys.
@end menu

@node Main menu, Download/upload list menu, , Menus and keys
@section Main menu
@cindex keys - main menu

@table @command

@item arrow-up
@item p
move one item up

@item arrow-down
@item o
move one item down

@item tab
@item i
change selected column

@item t
group/ungroup catalogs or files

@item end
@item u
go to the end off the list

@item home
@item y
go to the start off the list

@item F5
@item d
download/upload selected files and directories

@item w
reverse sorting

@item enter
@item x
execute a workgroup, host, share or directory

@item insert
@item a
select or unselect one item

@item page up
@item l
move one screen up

@item page down
@item k
move one screen down

@item F8
@item ctrl+d
delete selected files and directories

@item F7
@item c
create directory

@item F3
@item v
view text file, execute workgroup, host, share or directory

@item g
go to workgroup, host, share in remote host

@item e
change the type of sorting

@item s
edit download/upload list

@item m
send a WinPopup message

@item b
bookmark

@item bb
add item to bookmark

@item q
exit from Smbc
@end table

@node Download/upload list menu, Bookmark list menu, Main menu, Menus and keys
@section Download/upload list menu
@cindex keys - download/upload list
@table @command

@item q
exit from this menu

@item del
@item d
set selected item to delete

@item u
set selected item to undelete

@item m
mark/unmark selected item

@item space
pause/resume selected item download

@item ctrl+d
delete all dirs and subdirs of selected item

@item ctrl+f
flush all items

@item arrow-right
@item .
add 1 second to delay time

@item arrow-left
@item ,
take off 1 second from delay time

@item shift+arrow-right
@item >
add 60 seconds to delay time

@item shift+arrow-left
@item <
take off 60 seconds from delay time

@item ;
add 1 second to delay time for all items

@item '
take off 1 second from delay time for all items

@item :
add 60 seconds to delay time for all items

@item "
take off 60 seconds from delay time for all items

@item |
copy current item delay time to all items

@item n
set try download now to select item

@item N
set try download now to all items
@end table

@node Bookmark list menu, Message when connection is broken, Download/upload list menu, Menus and keys
@section Bookmark list menu
@cindex keys - bookmark list

@table @command

@item q
exit from this menu

@item b
add item to bookmark and exit

@item del
@item d
set selected item to delete

@item u
set selected item to undelete

@item m
mark/unmark item

@item enter
@item x
go to selected item
@end table

@node Message when connection is broken, Find file menu, Bookmark list menu, Menus and keys
@section Message when connection is broken
@cindex keys - connection is broken

@table @command
@item arrow-up
@item .
add 1 second to delay time

@item arrow-down
@item ,
take off 1 second from delay time

@item shift+arrow-up
@item >
add 60 seconds to delay time

@item shift+arrow-down
@item <
take off 60 seconds from delay time
@end table

@node Find file menu, , Message when connection is broken, Menus and keys
@section Find file menu
@cindex keys - find file

@subsection input items
@table @command
@item enter
@item tab
go to the next item

@item ctrl+p
enable/disable interactive filtering

@item ctrl+k
exit from find file menu
@end table

@subsection select items
@table @command
@item tab
go to the next item

@item enter
go to selected file

@item q
quit
@end table

@node Contributors, Copying, Menus and keys, Top
@chapter Contributors
@cindex contributors

@itemize @bullet
@item
My wife Magda for inspiration to work and my English correction of.
@item
Mikhail Kshevetskiy for implementation iconv in Smbc.
@item
Noel K@"{o}the for raports of bugs.
@end itemize


@node Copying, Index, Contributors, Top
@chapter Copying
@cindex copying
@cindex GPL
@cindex GFDL
@cindex free software

Samba Commander (Smbc) is licensed under the GNU GPL, which makes it @dfn{free
software}.

Please note that ``free'' in ``free software'' refers to liberty, not
price.  As some GNU project advocates like to point out, think of ``free
speech'' rather than ``free beer''.  The exact and legally binding
distribution terms are spelled out below; in short, you have the right
(freedom) to run and change Smbc and distribute it to other people.
The important restriction is that you have to grant your recipients the 
same rights and impose the same restrictions.

This method of licensing software is also known as @dfn{open source}
because, among other things, it makes sure that all recipients will
receive the source code along with the program, and be able to improve
it.  The GNU project prefers the term ``free software'' for reasons
outlined at
@url{http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-software-for-freedom.html}.

The exact license terms are defined by this paragraph and the GNU
General Public License it refers to:

@quotation
Samba Commander (Smbc) is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the
Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at your
option) any later version.

Samba Commander (Smbc) is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License
for more details.

A copy of the GNU General Public License is included as part of this
manual; if you did not receive it, write to the Free Software
Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
@end quotation

In addition to this, this manual is free in the same sense:

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with the
Invariant Sections being ``GNU General Public License'' and ``GNU Free
Documentation License'', with no Front-Cover Texts, and with no
Back-Cover Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the section
entitled ``GNU Free Documentation License''.
@end quotation

@c #### Maybe we should wrap these licenses in ifinfo?  Stallman says
@c that the GFDL needs to be present in the manual, and to me it would
@c suck to include the license for the manual and not the license for
@c the program.

The full texts of the GNU General Public License and of the GNU Free
Documentation License are available below.

@menu
* GNU General Public License::      GNU General Public License
* GNU Free Documentation License::  GNU Free Documentation License
@end menu

@node GNU General Public License, GNU Free Documentation License, Copying, Copying
@section GNU General Public License
@center Version 2, June 1991

@display
Copyright @copyright{} 1989, 1991 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA

Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies
of this license document, but changing it is not allowed.
@end display

@unnumberedsec Preamble

  The licenses for most software are designed to take away your
freedom to share and change it.  By contrast, the GNU General Public
License is intended to guarantee your freedom to share and change free
software---to make sure the software is free for all its users.  This
General Public License applies to most of the Free Software
Foundation's software and to any other program whose authors commit to
using it.  (Some other Free Software Foundation software is covered by
the GNU Library General Public License instead.)  You can apply it to
your programs, too.

  When we speak of free software, we are referring to freedom, not
price.  Our General Public Licenses are designed to make sure that you
have the freedom to distribute copies of free software (and charge for
this service if you wish), that you receive source code or can get it
if you want it, that you can change the software or use pieces of it
in new free programs; and that you know you can do these things.

  To protect your rights, we need to make restrictions that forbid
anyone to deny you these rights or to ask you to surrender the rights.
These restrictions translate to certain responsibilities for you if you
distribute copies of the software, or if you modify it.

  For example, if you distribute copies of such a program, whether
gratis or for a fee, you must give the recipients all the rights that
you have.  You must make sure that they, too, receive or can get the
source code.  And you must show them these terms so they know their
rights.

  We protect your rights with two steps: (1) copyright the software, and
(2) offer you this license which gives you legal permission to copy,
distribute and/or modify the software.

  Also, for each author's protection and ours, we want to make certain
that everyone understands that there is no warranty for this free
software.  If the software is modified by someone else and passed on, we
want its recipients to know that what they have is not the original, so
that any problems introduced by others will not reflect on the original
authors' reputations.

  Finally, any free program is threatened constantly by software
patents.  We wish to avoid the danger that redistributors of a free
program will individually obtain patent licenses, in effect making the
program proprietary.  To prevent this, we have made it clear that any
patent must be licensed for everyone's free use or not licensed at all.

  The precise terms and conditions for copying, distribution and
modification follow.

@iftex
@unnumberedsec TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR COPYING, DISTRIBUTION AND MODIFICATION
@end iftex
@ifnottex
@center TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR COPYING, DISTRIBUTION AND MODIFICATION
@end ifnottex

@enumerate
@item
This License applies to any program or other work which contains
a notice placed by the copyright holder saying it may be distributed
under the terms of this General Public License.  The ``Program'', below,
refers to any such program or work, and a ``work based on the Program''
means either the Program or any derivative work under copyright law:
that is to say, a work containing the Program or a portion of it,
either verbatim or with modifications and/or translated into another
language.  (Hereinafter, translation is included without limitation in
the term ``modification''.)  Each licensee is addressed as ``you''.

Activities other than copying, distribution and modification are not
covered by this License; they are outside its scope.  The act of
running the Program is not restricted, and the output from the Program
is covered only if its contents constitute a work based on the
Program (independent of having been made by running the Program).
Whether that is true depends on what the Program does.

@item
You may copy and distribute verbatim copies of the Program's
source code as you receive it, in any medium, provided that you
conspicuously and appropriately publish on each copy an appropriate
copyright notice and disclaimer of warranty; keep intact all the
notices that refer to this License and to the absence of any warranty;
and give any other recipients of the Program a copy of this License
along with the Program.

You may charge a fee for the physical act of transferring a copy, and
you may at your option offer warranty protection in exchange for a fee.

@item
You may modify your copy or copies of the Program or any portion
of it, thus forming a work based on the Program, and copy and
distribute such modifications or work under the terms of Section 1
above, provided that you also meet all of these conditions:

@enumerate a
@item
You must cause the modified files to carry prominent notices
stating that you changed the files and the date of any change.

@item
You must cause any work that you distribute or publish, that in
whole or in part contains or is derived from the Program or any
part thereof, to be licensed as a whole at no charge to all third
parties under the terms of this License.

@item
If the modified program normally reads commands interactively
when run, you must cause it, when started running for such
interactive use in the most ordinary way, to print or display an
announcement including an appropriate copyright notice and a
notice that there is no warranty (or else, saying that you provide
a warranty) and that users may redistribute the program under
these conditions, and telling the user how to view a copy of this
License.  (Exception: if the Program itself is interactive but
does not normally print such an announcement, your work based on
the Program is not required to print an announcement.)
@end enumerate

These requirements apply to the modified work as a whole.  If
identifiable sections of that work are not derived from the Program,
and can be reasonably considered independent and separate works in
themselves, then this License, and its terms, do not apply to those
sections when you distribute them as separate works.  But when you
distribute the same sections as part of a whole which is a work based
on the Program, the distribution of the whole must be on the terms of
this License, whose permissions for other licensees extend to the
entire whole, and thus to each and every part regardless of who wrote it.

Thus, it is not the intent of this section to claim rights or contest
your rights to work written entirely by you; rather, the intent is to
exercise the right to control the distribution of derivative or
collective works based on the Program.

In addition, mere aggregation of another work not based on the Program
with the Program (or with a work based on the Program) on a volume of
a storage or distribution medium does not bring the other work under
the scope of this License.

@item
You may copy and distribute the Program (or a work based on it,
under Section 2) in object code or executable form under the terms of
Sections 1 and 2 above provided that you also do one of the following:

@enumerate a
@item
Accompany it with the complete corresponding machine-readable
source code, which must be distributed under the terms of Sections
1 and 2 above on a medium customarily used for software interchange; or,

@item
Accompany it with a written offer, valid for at least three
years, to give any third party, for a charge no more than your
cost of physically performing source distribution, a complete
machine-readable copy of the corresponding source code, to be
distributed under the terms of Sections 1 and 2 above on a medium
customarily used for software interchange; or,

@item
Accompany it with the information you received as to the offer
to distribute corresponding source code.  (This alternative is
allowed only for noncommercial distribution and only if you
received the program in object code or executable form with such
an offer, in accord with Subsection b above.)
@end enumerate

The source code for a work means the preferred form of the work for
making modifications to it.  For an executable work, complete source
code means all the source code for all modules it contains, plus any
associated interface definition files, plus the scripts used to
control compilation and installation of the executable.  However, as a
special exception, the source code distributed need not include
anything that is normally distributed (in either source or binary
form) with the major components (compiler, kernel, and so on) of the
operating system on which the executable runs, unless that component
itself accompanies the executable.

If distribution of executable or object code is made by offering
access to copy from a designated place, then offering equivalent
access to copy the source code from the same place counts as
distribution of the source code, even though third parties are not
compelled to copy the source along with the object code.

@item
You may not copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute the Program
except as expressly provided under this License.  Any attempt
otherwise to copy, modify, sublicense or distribute the Program is
void, and will automatically terminate your rights under this License.
However, parties who have received copies, or rights, from you under
this License will not have their licenses terminated so long as such
parties remain in full compliance.

@item
You are not required to accept this License, since you have not
signed it.  However, nothing else grants you permission to modify or
distribute the Program or its derivative works.  These actions are
prohibited by law if you do not accept this License.  Therefore, by
modifying or distributing the Program (or any work based on the
Program), you indicate your acceptance of this License to do so, and
all its terms and conditions for copying, distributing or modifying
the Program or works based on it.

@item
Each time you redistribute the Program (or any work based on the
Program), the recipient automatically receives a license from the
original licensor to copy, distribute or modify the Program subject to
these terms and conditions.  You may not impose any further
restrictions on the recipients' exercise of the rights granted herein.
You are not responsible for enforcing compliance by third parties to
this License.

@item
If, as a consequence of a court judgment or allegation of patent
infringement or for any other reason (not limited to patent issues),
conditions are imposed on you (whether by court order, agreement or
otherwise) that contradict the conditions of this License, they do not
excuse you from the conditions of this License.  If you cannot
distribute so as to satisfy simultaneously your obligations under this
License and any other pertinent obligations, then as a consequence you
may not distribute the Program at all.  For example, if a patent
license would not permit royalty-free redistribution of the Program by
all those who receive copies directly or indirectly through you, then
the only way you could satisfy both it and this License would be to
refrain entirely from distribution of the Program.

If any portion of this section is held invalid or unenforceable under
any particular circumstance, the balance of the section is intended to
apply and the section as a whole is intended to apply in other
circumstances.

It is not the purpose of this section to induce you to infringe any
patents or other property right claims or to contest validity of any
such claims; this section has the sole purpose of protecting the
integrity of the free software distribution system, which is
implemented by public license practices.  Many people have made
generous contributions to the wide range of software distributed
through that system in reliance on consistent application of that
system; it is up to the author/donor to decide if he or she is willing
to distribute software through any other system and a licensee cannot
impose that choice.

This section is intended to make thoroughly clear what is believed to
be a consequence of the rest of this License.

@item
If the distribution and/or use of the Program is restricted in
certain countries either by patents or by copyrighted interfaces, the
original copyright holder who places the Program under this License
may add an explicit geographical distribution limitation excluding
those countries, so that distribution is permitted only in or among
countries not thus excluded.  In such case, this License incorporates
the limitation as if written in the body of this License.

@item
The Free Software Foundation may publish revised and/or new versions
of the General Public License from time to time.  Such new versions will
be similar in spirit to the present version, but may differ in detail to
address new problems or concerns.

Each version is given a distinguishing version number.  If the Program
specifies a version number of this License which applies to it and ``any
later version'', you have the option of following the terms and conditions
either of that version or of any later version published by the Free
Software Foundation.  If the Program does not specify a version number of
this License, you may choose any version ever published by the Free Software
Foundation.

@item
If you wish to incorporate parts of the Program into other free
programs whose distribution conditions are different, write to the author
to ask for permission.  For software which is copyrighted by the Free
Software Foundation, write to the Free Software Foundation; we sometimes
make exceptions for this.  Our decision will be guided by the two goals
of preserving the free status of all derivatives of our free software and
of promoting the sharing and reuse of software generally.

@iftex
@heading NO WARRANTY
@end iftex
@ifnottex
@center NO WARRANTY
@end ifnottex
@cindex no warranty

@item
BECAUSE THE PROGRAM IS LICENSED FREE OF CHARGE, THERE IS NO WARRANTY
FOR THE PROGRAM, TO THE EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAW.  EXCEPT WHEN
OTHERWISE STATED IN WRITING THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND/OR OTHER PARTIES
PROVIDE THE PROGRAM ``AS IS'' WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED
OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  THE ENTIRE RISK AS
TO THE QUALITY AND PERFORMANCE OF THE PROGRAM IS WITH YOU.  SHOULD THE
PROGRAM PROVE DEFECTIVE, YOU ASSUME THE COST OF ALL NECESSARY SERVICING,
REPAIR OR CORRECTION.

@item
IN NO EVENT UNLESS REQUIRED BY APPLICABLE LAW OR AGREED TO IN WRITING
WILL ANY COPYRIGHT HOLDER, OR ANY OTHER PARTY WHO MAY MODIFY AND/OR
REDISTRIBUTE THE PROGRAM AS PERMITTED ABOVE, BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR DAMAGES,
INCLUDING ANY GENERAL, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES ARISING
OUT OF THE USE OR INABILITY TO USE THE PROGRAM (INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED
TO LOSS OF DATA OR DATA BEING RENDERED INACCURATE OR LOSSES SUSTAINED BY
YOU OR THIRD PARTIES OR A FAILURE OF THE PROGRAM TO OPERATE WITH ANY OTHER
PROGRAMS), EVEN IF SUCH HOLDER OR OTHER PARTY HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.
@end enumerate

@iftex
@heading END OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS
@end iftex
@ifnottex
@center END OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS
@end ifnottex

@page
@node GNU Free Documentation License,  , GNU General Public License, Copying
@section GNU Free Documentation License
@center Version 1.1, March 2000

@display
Copyright (C) 2000  Free Software Foundation, Inc.
59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA  02111-1307  USA

Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies
of this license document, but changing it is not allowed.
@end display
@sp 1
@enumerate 0
@item
PREAMBLE

The purpose of this License is to make a manual, textbook, or other
written document ``free'' in the sense of freedom: to assure everyone
the effective freedom to copy and redistribute it, with or without
modifying it, either commercially or noncommercially.  Secondarily,
this License preserves for the author and publisher a way to get
credit for their work, while not being considered responsible for
modifications made by others.

This License is a kind of ``copyleft'', which means that derivative
works of the document must themselves be free in the same sense.  It
complements the GNU General Public License, which is a copyleft
license designed for free software.

We have designed this License in order to use it for manuals for free
software, because free software needs free documentation: a free
program should come with manuals providing the same freedoms that the
software does.  But this License is not limited to software manuals;
it can be used for any textual work, regardless of subject matter or
whether it is published as a printed book.  We recommend this License
principally for works whose purpose is instruction or reference.

@sp 1
@item
APPLICABILITY AND DEFINITIONS

This License applies to any manual or other work that contains a
notice placed by the copyright holder saying it can be distributed
under the terms of this License.  The ``Document'', below, refers to any
such manual or work.  Any member of the public is a licensee, and is
addressed as ``you''.

A ``Modified Version'' of the Document means any work containing the
Document or a portion of it, either copied verbatim, or with
modifications and/or translated into another language.

A ``Secondary Section'' is a named appendix or a front-matter section of
the Document that deals exclusively with the relationship of the
publishers or authors of the Document to the Document's overall subject
(or to related matters) and contains nothing that could fall directly
within that overall subject.  (For example, if the Document is in part a
textbook of mathematics, a Secondary Section may not explain any
mathematics.)  The relationship could be a matter of historical
connection with the subject or with related matters, or of legal,
commercial, philosophical, ethical or political position regarding
them.

The ``Invariant Sections'' are certain Secondary Sections whose titles
are designated, as being those of Invariant Sections, in the notice
that says that the Document is released under this License.

The ``Cover Texts'' are certain short passages of text that are listed,
as Front-Cover Texts or Back-Cover Texts, in the notice that says that
the Document is released under this License.

A ``Transparent'' copy of the Document means a machine-readable copy,
represented in a format whose specification is available to the
general public, whose contents can be viewed and edited directly and
straightforwardly with generic text editors or (for images composed of
pixels) generic paint programs or (for drawings) some widely available
drawing editor, and that is suitable for input to text formatters or
for automatic translation to a variety of formats suitable for input
to text formatters.  A copy made in an otherwise Transparent file
format whose markup has been designed to thwart or discourage
subsequent modification by readers is not Transparent.  A copy that is
not ``Transparent'' is called ``Opaque''.

Examples of suitable formats for Transparent copies include plain
@sc{ascii} without markup, Texinfo input format, LaTeX input format, @sc{sgml}
or @sc{xml} using a publicly available @sc{dtd}, and standard-conforming simple
@sc{html} designed for human modification.  Opaque formats include
PostScript, @sc{pdf}, proprietary formats that can be read and edited only
by proprietary word processors, @sc{sgml} or @sc{xml} for which the @sc{dtd} and/or
processing tools are not generally available, and the
machine-generated @sc{html} produced by some word processors for output
purposes only.

The ``Title Page'' means, for a printed book, the title page itself,
plus such following pages as are needed to hold, legibly, the material
this License requires to appear in the title page.  For works in
formats which do not have any title page as such, ``Title Page'' means
the text near the most prominent appearance of the work's title,
preceding the beginning of the body of the text.
@sp 1
@item
VERBATIM COPYING

You may copy and distribute the Document in any medium, either
commercially or noncommercially, provided that this License, the
copyright notices, and the license notice saying this License applies
to the Document are reproduced in all copies, and that you add no other
conditions whatsoever to those of this License.  You may not use
technical measures to obstruct or control the reading or further
copying of the copies you make or distribute.  However, you may accept
compensation in exchange for copies.  If you distribute a large enough
number of copies you must also follow the conditions in section 3.

You may also lend copies, under the same conditions stated above, and
you may publicly display copies.
@sp 1
@item
COPYING IN QUANTITY

If you publish printed copies of the Document numbering more than 100,
and the Document's license notice requires Cover Texts, you must enclose
the copies in covers that carry, clearly and legibly, all these Cover
Texts: Front-Cover Texts on the front cover, and Back-Cover Texts on
the back cover.  Both covers must also clearly and legibly identify
you as the publisher of these copies.  The front cover must present
the full title with all words of the title equally prominent and
visible.  You may add other material on the covers in addition.
Copying with changes limited to the covers, as long as they preserve
the title of the Document and satisfy these conditions, can be treated
as verbatim copying in other respects.

If the required texts for either cover are too voluminous to fit
legibly, you should put the first ones listed (as many as fit
reasonably) on the actual cover, and continue the rest onto adjacent
pages.

If you publish or distribute Opaque copies of the Document numbering
more than 100, you must either include a machine-readable Transparent
copy along with each Opaque copy, or state in or with each Opaque copy
a publicly-accessible computer-network location containing a complete
Transparent copy of the Document, free of added material, which the
general network-using public has access to download anonymously at no
charge using public-standard network protocols.  If you use the latter
option, you must take reasonably prudent steps, when you begin
distribution of Opaque copies in quantity, to ensure that this
Transparent copy will remain thus accessible at the stated location
until at least one year after the last time you distribute an Opaque
copy (directly or through your agents or retailers) of that edition to
the public.

It is requested, but not required, that you contact the authors of the
Document well before redistributing any large number of copies, to give
them a chance to provide you with an updated version of the Document.
@sp 1
@item
MODIFICATIONS

You may copy and distribute a Modified Version of the Document under
the conditions of sections 2 and 3 above, provided that you release
the Modified Version under precisely this License, with the Modified
Version filling the role of the Document, thus licensing distribution
and modification of the Modified Version to whoever possesses a copy
of it.  In addition, you must do these things in the Modified Version:

A. Use in the Title Page (and on the covers, if any) a title distinct
   from that of the Document, and from those of previous versions
   (which should, if there were any, be listed in the History section
   of the Document).  You may use the same title as a previous version
   if the original publisher of that version gives permission.@*
B. List on the Title Page, as authors, one or more persons or entities
   responsible for authorship of the modifications in the Modified
   Version, together with at least five of the principal authors of the
   Document (all of its principal authors, if it has less than five).@*
C. State on the Title page the name of the publisher of the
   Modified Version, as the publisher.@*
D. Preserve all the copyright notices of the Document.@*
E. Add an appropriate copyright notice for your modifications
   adjacent to the other copyright notices.@*
F. Include, immediately after the copyright notices, a license notice
   giving the public permission to use the Modified Version under the
   terms of this License, in the form shown in the Addendum below.@*
G. Preserve in that license notice the full lists of Invariant Sections
   and required Cover Texts given in the Document's license notice.@*
H. Include an unaltered copy of this License.@*
I. Preserve the section entitled ``History'', and its title, and add to
   it an item stating at least the title, year, new authors, and
   publisher of the Modified Version as given on the Title Page.  If
   there is no section entitled ``History'' in the Document, create one
   stating the title, year, authors, and publisher of the Document as
   given on its Title Page, then add an item describing the Modified
   Version as stated in the previous sentence.@*
J. Preserve the network location, if any, given in the Document for
   public access to a Transparent copy of the Document, and likewise
   the network locations given in the Document for previous versions
   it was based on.  These may be placed in the ``History'' section.
   You may omit a network location for a work that was published at
   least four years before the Document itself, or if the original
   publisher of the version it refers to gives permission.@*
K. In any section entitled ``Acknowledgements'' or ``Dedications'',
   preserve the section's title, and preserve in the section all the
   substance and tone of each of the contributor acknowledgements
   and/or dedications given therein.@*
L. Preserve all the Invariant Sections of the Document,
   unaltered in their text and in their titles.  Section numbers
   or the equivalent are not considered part of the section titles.@*
M. Delete any section entitled ``Endorsements''.  Such a section
   may not be included in the Modified Version.@*
N. Do not retitle any existing section as ``Endorsements''
   or to conflict in title with any Invariant Section.@*
@sp 1
If the Modified Version includes new front-matter sections or
appendices that qualify as Secondary Sections and contain no material
copied from the Document, you may at your option designate some or all
of these sections as invariant.  To do this, add their titles to the
list of Invariant Sections in the Modified Version's license notice.
These titles must be distinct from any other section titles.

You may add a section entitled ``Endorsements'', provided it contains
nothing but endorsements of your Modified Version by various
parties--for example, statements of peer review or that the text has
been approved by an organization as the authoritative definition of a
standard.

You may add a passage of up to five words as a Front-Cover Text, and a
passage of up to 25 words as a Back-Cover Text, to the end of the list
of Cover Texts in the Modified Version.  Only one passage of
Front-Cover Text and one of Back-Cover Text may be added by (or
through arrangements made by) any one entity.  If the Document already
includes a cover text for the same cover, previously added by you or
by arrangement made by the same entity you are acting on behalf of,
you may not add another; but you may replace the old one, on explicit
permission from the previous publisher that added the old one.

The author(s) and publisher(s) of the Document do not by this License
give permission to use their names for publicity for or to assert or
imply endorsement of any Modified Version.
@sp 1
@item
COMBINING DOCUMENTS

You may combine the Document with other documents released under this
License, under the terms defined in section 4 above for modified
versions, provided that you include in the combination all of the
Invariant Sections of all of the original documents, unmodified, and
list them all as Invariant Sections of your combined work in its
license notice.

The combined work need only contain one copy of this License, and
multiple identical Invariant Sections may be replaced with a single
copy.  If there are multiple Invariant Sections with the same name but
different contents, make the title of each such section unique by
adding at the end of it, in parentheses, the name of the original
author or publisher of that section if known, or else a unique number.
Make the same adjustment to the section titles in the list of
Invariant Sections in the license notice of the combined work.

In the combination, you must combine any sections entitled ``History''
in the various original documents, forming one section entitled
``History''; likewise combine any sections entitled ``Acknowledgements'',
and any sections entitled ``Dedications''.  You must delete all sections
entitled ``Endorsements.''
@sp 1
@item
COLLECTIONS OF DOCUMENTS

You may make a collection consisting of the Document and other documents
released under this License, and replace the individual copies of this
License in the various documents with a single copy that is included in
the collection, provided that you follow the rules of this License for
verbatim copying of each of the documents in all other respects.

You may extract a single document from such a collection, and distribute
it individually under this License, provided you insert a copy of this
License into the extracted document, and follow this License in all
other respects regarding verbatim copying of that document.
@sp 1
@item
AGGREGATION WITH INDEPENDENT WORKS

A compilation of the Document or its derivatives with other separate
and independent documents or works, in or on a volume of a storage or
distribution medium, does not as a whole count as a Modified Version
of the Document, provided no compilation copyright is claimed for the
compilation.  Such a compilation is called an ``aggregate'', and this
License does not apply to the other self-contained works thus compiled
with the Document, on account of their being thus compiled, if they
are not themselves derivative works of the Document.

If the Cover Text requirement of section 3 is applicable to these
copies of the Document, then if the Document is less than one quarter
of the entire aggregate, the Document's Cover Texts may be placed on
covers that surround only the Document within the aggregate.
Otherwise they must appear on covers around the whole aggregate.
@sp 1
@item
TRANSLATION

Translation is considered a kind of modification, so you may
distribute translations of the Document under the terms of section 4.
Replacing Invariant Sections with translations requires special
permission from their copyright holders, but you may include
translations of some or all Invariant Sections in addition to the
original versions of these Invariant Sections.  You may include a
translation of this License provided that you also include the
original English version of this License.  In case of a disagreement
between the translation and the original English version of this
License, the original English version will prevail.
@sp 1
@item
TERMINATION

You may not copy, modify, sublicense, or distribute the Document except
as expressly provided for under this License.  Any other attempt to
copy, modify, sublicense or distribute the Document is void, and will
automatically terminate your rights under this License.  However,
parties who have received copies, or rights, from you under this
License will not have their licenses terminated so long as such
parties remain in full compliance.
@sp 1
@item
FUTURE REVISIONS OF THIS LICENSE

The Free Software Foundation may publish new, revised versions
of the GNU Free Documentation License from time to time.  Such new
versions will be similar in spirit to the present version, but may
differ in detail to address new problems or concerns.  See
http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/.

Each version of the License is given a distinguishing version number.
If the Document specifies that a particular numbered version of this
License ``or any later version'' applies to it, you have the option of
following the terms and conditions either of that specified version or
of any later version that has been published (not as a draft) by the
Free Software Foundation.  If the Document does not specify a version
number of this License, you may choose any version ever published (not
as a draft) by the Free Software Foundation.

@end enumerate

@unnumberedsec ADDENDUM: How to use this License for your documents

To use this License in a document you have written, include a copy of
the License in the document and put the following copyright and
license notices just after the title page:

@smallexample
@group

  Copyright (C)  @var{year}  @var{your name}.
  Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
  under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1
  or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
  with the Invariant Sections being @var{list their titles}, with the
  Front-Cover Texts being @var{list}, and with the Back-Cover Texts being @var{list}.
  A copy of the license is included in the section entitled ``GNU
  Free Documentation License''.
@end group
@end smallexample
If you have no Invariant Sections, write ``with no Invariant Sections''
instead of saying which ones are invariant.  If you have no
Front-Cover Texts, write ``no Front-Cover Texts'' instead of
``Front-Cover Texts being @var{list}''; likewise for Back-Cover Texts.

If your document contains nontrivial examples of program code, we
recommend releasing these examples in parallel under your choice of
free software license, such as the GNU General Public License,
to permit their use in free software.

@node Index, , Copying, Top
@unnumbered Index
@printindex cp

@contents

@bye

