.TH SMBCRC 1 "February 2005" "SMBCRC for SMBC Version 1.1.2" "Samba Commander configuration file"
.SH NAME
smbcrc \- configuration file for Smbc
.SH DESCRIPTION
A file smbcrc incude all parameters for Smbc. The value in parameters
you can set at two types:
.PP
.nf
    username John Doe
    or
    username "John Doe"
.fi
.SH OPTIONS
.IP "\fBusername\fR" 4
Username that is used during login to remote host, default "guest".
.PP
    Example:
.PP
.nf
    username Jon Doe
.fi
.IP "\fBpassword\fR" 4
Password that is enter during login to remote host, default none.
.PP
    Example:
.PP
.nf
    password bryDS2team
.fi
.IP "\fBsmbclient\fR" 4
Path to file "smbclient", necessery for sending WinPopup message, 
default none. Only functions concantenate with send and receive a 
WinPopup messages work as frontend, Samba Team doesn't include this 
functions in libsmbclient library.
.PP
    Example:
.PP
.nf
    smbclient /usr/bin/smbclient
.fi
.IP "\fBlocaldir\fR" 4
Start local directory when running Smbc, default HOME.
.PP
    Example:
.PP
.nf
    localdir /home/rafim/tym
.fi
.IP "\fBworkgroup\fR" 4
Start workgroup, default none.
.PP
    Example:
.PP
.nf
    workgroup WORKGROUP
.fi
.IP "\fBhost\fR" 4
Start host, default none.
.PP
    Example:
.PP
.nf
    host AIR
.fi
.IP "\fBshare\fR" 4
Start remote host dir, default none.
.PP
    Example:
.PP
.nf
    share /sciepa/mpg/
.fi
.PP
.IP "\fBtypeofsort-left\fR" 4
.PD 0
.IP "\fBtypeofsort-right\fR" 4
.PD
Type of sort files and directories in selected panels, default 1.
.PP
.nf
    typeofsort-left 1 - sort by filenames
    typeofsort-left 2 - sort by extension
    typeofsort-left 3 - sort by size
    typeofsort-left 4 - don't sort
.fi
.PP
    Examples:
.PP
.nf
    typeofsort-left 1
    typeofsort-right 1
.fi
.IP "\fBrevesesort-left\fR" 4
.PD 0
.IP "\fBrevesesort-right\fR" 4
.PD
Type of reverse sorting, default 0.
.PP
.nf
    revesesort-left 1 - reversesort on
    revesesort-left 0 - reversesort off
.fi
.PP
    Examples:
.PP
.nf
    revesesort-left 0
    revesesort-right 0
.fi
.IP "\fBgroup-left\fR" 4
.PD 0
.IP "\fBgroup-right\fR" 4
.PD
Group files and directories, default 1.
.PP
.nf
    group-left 1 - group on
    group-left 0 - group off
.fi
.PP
    Examples:
.PP
.nf
    group-left 1
    group-right 1
.fi
.IP "\fBtimeout\fR" 4
Connection time out in seconds, default 3 seconds. This parameter was used 
when Smbc tries connect to remote host and waits for response. If you have
the Samba in version oldest than 3.0.0 this parameter don't work and
Smbc may be waiting for very long time.
.PP
    Example:
.PP
.nf
    timeout 3
.fi
.IP "\fBautoresume\fR" 4
Auto resume download, doesn't ask if connection is broken, default 0.
If connection to remote host or to local file was broken and autoresume
was set 1 Smbc sets retry-delay-time for this file and immediatelly
goes to next item in download/upload list.
.PP
.nf
    autoresume 1 - autoresume on
    autoresume 0 - autoresume off
.fi
.PP
    Example:
.PP
.nf
    autoresume 1
.fi
.IP "\fBindextime\fR" 4
Time between smbc restarts network files indexing in seconds,
default 300 seconds.
.PP
.nf
    indextime 0     smbc disable indexing network files
    indextime 1     smbc ony once index network files
    indextime 300   smbc index network files then delay 300 second 
                    and restart indexing
.fi
.PP
    Example:
.PP
.nf
    indextime 300
.fi
.IP "\fBchar-convert\fR" 4
Converts all chars from UTF-8 to terminal charset, default 1.
.PP
.nf
    char-convert 1 - char-convert on
    char-convert 0 - char-convert off
.fi
.fi
.PP
    Example:
.PP
.nf
    char-convert 1
.fi
.IP "\fBretry-delay-time\fR" 4
Delay time of retrying download is seconds, default 60 second.
.fi
.PP
    Example:
.PP
.nf
    retry-delay-time 60
.fi
.IP "\fBaskquit\fR" 4
Ask if quit from smbc, default 1.
.IP "\fBretry-read-groups\fR" 4
How many times smbc retries to read groups when samba returns fail 
or empty result, default retry-read-groups 5.
.PP
.nf
    retry-read-groups = -1 - retries to success
    retry-read-groups = 0  - doesn't retry
    retry-read-groups > 0  - retries retry-read-groups times
.fi
.IP "\fBretry-read-hosts\fR" 4
How many times smbc retries to read hosts when samba returns fail 
or empty result, default retry-read-hosts 5.
.PP
.nf
   retry-read-hosts = -1 - retries to success
   retry-read-hosts = 0  - doesn't retry
   retry-read-hosts > 0  - retries retry-read-hosts times
.fi
.IP "\fBretry-read-shares\fR" 4
How many times smbc retries to read shares when samba returns fail 
or empty result, default retry-read-shares 5.
.PP
.nf
   retry-read-shares = -1 - retries to success
   retry-read-shares = 0  - doesn't retry
   retry-read-shares > 0  - retries retry-read-shares times
.fi
.IP "\fBcolorK XXXX,YYYY,ZZZZ\fR" 4
Defines three colors, where XXXX,YYYY,ZZZZ are red,green,blue 
and have value = <0000..1000> ,K has value <0..2>,
default 0 colors defined.
.PP
    Examples:
.PP
.nf
    color0 0100,0100,0610
    color1 0900,0080,0900
    color2 0010,0500,0500
.fi
.IP "\fBextcolorK\fR" 4
Define color for file extension, K has value <0..2>, one 
definition per line, maximal extension length = 10 chars
,default 0 colors defined.
.PP
    Examples:
.PP
.nf
    extcolor0 exe
    extcolor0 bin
    extcolor0 bat
    extcolor0 tar
    extcolor0 gz
    extcolor0 tgz
    extcolor1 mp3
    extcolor1 wav
    extcolor1 mod
    extcolor2 avi
    extcolor2 mpg
    extcolor2 mpeg
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR smbcrc (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Originally written by Rafal Michniewicz <rafim@data.pl>.

