.TH SMBC 1 "February 2005" "SMBC Version 1.1.2" "Samba Commander"
.SH NAME
smbc \- Text mode SMB network commander.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Samba Commander is a text mode SMB network commander. With SMBC, 
you can browse your local network or use the search function to 
find files in a share. You can also download/upload files and 
directories or create them both locally and remotely. SMBC 
features the resume capability and UTF-8 encoding support.
.SH OPTIONS
.IP "\fB\-V\fR" 4
.PD 0
.IP "\fB\-\-version\fR" 4
.PD
Displays the version of Smbc.
.IP "\fB\-h\fR" 4
.PD 0
.IP "\fB\-\-help\fR" 4
.PD
Prints a help message describing all Smbc's command-line options.
.IP "\fB\-f\fR" 4
.PD 0
.IP "\fB\-\-flush\fR" 4
.PD
Flushes all download lists. All files from ~/.smbc/ with dulist* name
will be removed. In next run of Smbc the download/upload list will be 
empty.
.IP "\fB\-l\fR" 4
.PD 0
.IP "\fB\-\-list\fR" 4
.PD
Shows all download lists from ~/.smbc/.
.IP "\fB\-s INT\fR" 4
.PD 0
.IP "\fB\-\-show=INT\fR" 4
.PD
Displays all items form list with INT numer. You can get all numers from
the list executing smbc -l command.
.IP "\fB\-p\fR" 4
.PD 0
.IP "\fB\-\-sleep\fR" 4
.PD
Sleeps Smbc. Smbc doesn't download/upload any files when execuding even 
if some files waiting in queue.
.IP "\fB\-m STRING\fR" 4
.PD 0
.IP "\fB\-\-message=STRING\fR" 4
.PD
Receives message from samba. If you want that Smbc receives WinPopup
message you must add bellow line to smb.conf 
.PP
.I message command = /path_to/smbc -m 'message from %f on %m' -i %s; rm %s
.PP
Now if you have running Smbc and someone sends you a WinPopup message
Smbc immediatelly display it. If you don't run a Smbc all WinPopup 
messages wait for executing a Smbc.
.IP "\fB\-i STRING\fR" 4
.PD 0
.IP "\fB\-\-file=STRING\fR" 4
Sets file with samba message, usage only with -m.
.PD
.SH "MENUS AND KEYS"
At top of the main menu is mini status bar. There is displayed small
help with functions. When Smbc downloads/uploads any file in mini status
bar is displayed progress of downloading/uploading.
.SH "  main menu - keys"
.PD 0
.I (arrow-up) (p)
- move one item up
.PP
.I (arrow-down) (o)
- move one item down
.PP
.I (tab) (i)
- change selected column
.PP
.I (t)
- group/ungroup catalog or files
.PP
.I (end) (u)
- go to the end off list
.PP
.I (home) (y)
- go to the start off list
.PP
.I (F5) (d)
- download/upload selected files and directories
.PP
.I (w)
- reverse sorting
.PP
.I (enter) (x)
- execute a workgroup, host, share or directory
.PP
.I (insert) (a)
- select or unselect one item
.PP
.I (page up) (l)
- move one screen up
.PP
.I (page down) (k)
- move one screen down
.PP
.I (F8) (ctrl+d)
- delete selected files and directories
.PP
.I (F7) (c)
- create directory
.PP
.I (F3) (v)
- view text file, execute workgroup, host, share or directory
.PP
.I (g)
- go to workgroup, host, share in remote host
.PP
.I (e)
- change type of sorting
.PP
.I (s)
- edit download/upload list
.PP
.I (m)
- send a WinPopup message
.PP
.I (b)
- bookmark
.PP
.I (bb)
- add item to bookmark
.PP
.I (q)
- exit from Smbc
.PD
.SH "  download/upload list menu - keys"
.PD 0
.PP
.I (q)
- exit from this menu
.PP
.I (del) (d)
- set selected item to delete
.PP
.I (u)
- set selected item to undelete
.PP
.I (m)
- mark/unmark selected item
.PP
.I (space)
- pause/resume selected item download
.PP
.I (ctrl+d)
- delete all dirs and subdirs for selected item
.PP
.I (ctrl+f)
- flush all items
.PP
.I (arrow-right) (.)
- add 1 second to delay time
.PP
.I (arrow-left) (,)
- take off 1 second from delay time
.PP
.I (shift+arrow-right) (>)
- add 60 seconds to delay time
.PP
.I (shift+arrow-left) (<)
- take off 60 seconds from delay time
.PP
.I (;)
- add 1 second to delay time for all items
.PP
.I (')
- take off 1 second from delay time for all items
.PP
.I (:)
- add 60 seconds to delay time for all items
.PP
.I (")
- take off 60 seconds from delay time for all items
.PP
.I (|)
- copy current item delay time to all items
.PP
.I (n)
- set try download now to select item
.PP
.I (N)
- set try download now to all items
.PD
.SH "  bookmark list menu - keys"
.PD 0
.PP
.I (q)
- exit from this menu
.PP
.I (b)
- add item to bookmark and exit
.PP
.I (del) (d)
- set selected item to delete
.PP
.I (u)
- set selected item to undelete
.PP
.I (m)
- mark/unmark item
.PP
.I (enter) (x)
- go to selected item
.PD
.PD
.SH "  message when connection broken - keys"
.PD 0
.PP
.I (arrow-up) (.)
- add 1 second to delay time
.PP
.I (arrow-down) (,)
- take off 1 second from delay time
.PP
.I (shift+arrow-up) (>)
- add 60 seconds to delay time
.PP
.I (shift+arrow-down) (<)
- take off 60 seconds from delay time
.PD
.PD
.SH "  find file menu - keys"
.PD 0
.PP
> input items <
.PP
.I (enter) (tab)
- go to the next item
.PP
.I (ctrl+p)
- enable/disable interactive filtering
.PP
.I (ctrl+k)
- exit from find file menu
.PP
> select items <
.PP
.I (tab)
- go to the next item
.PP
.I (enter)
- go to selected file
.PP
.I (q)
- quit
.PD
.SH "AVAILABILITY"
The latest version of this program can be found at 
http://smbc.airm.net.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
README
.SH BUGS
.PD 0
You are welcome to send bug reports about Smbc to
.PP
<smbc@airm.net>.
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR smbc (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Originally written by Rafal Michniewicz <rafim@data.pl>.

